---
title: Maximum Likelihood Estimation
description: This is a post on My Blog about agile frameworks.
date: 2026-04-10
tags: Deep Learning, Machine Learning
---

{% set linearRegressionPost = "" %}

{% for post in collections.posts %}
  {% if post.data.title == "Linear Regression" %}
    {% set linearRegressionPost = post.url %}
  {% endif %}
{% endfor %}

In Machine Learning, we often assume that the data we sample follows a certain unknown distribution. The goal of the machine learning algorithm is to find the parameters of this distribution that best fit the data. Or at least, find a model that is as close as possible to the true underlying distribution.

While we haven't discussed this explicitly, the <a href={{linearRegressionPost}}>linear regression</a> model that we discussed previously aims to fit a distribution as well. This distribution can be described by the model below.

$$ y_i = w^Tx_i + \epsilon \quad \text{where} \quad \epsilon \sim N(0, \sigma^2) $$

And therefore

$$ y_i \sim N(w^Tx_i, \sigma^2) $$

Now that we have a statistical model, we can use it to find the weights that best fit the data. This is similar to how we previously found the weights that minimize the MSE, although we will now use a more statistical approach.

## Finding the weights that maximize the likelihood


Using the definition of the normal distribution, we can define the probability of data point $y_i$ as follows:

$$P(y_i | x_i; w) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi\sigma^2}} \exp\left( -\frac{(y_i - x_i^Tw)^2}{2\sigma^2} \right)$$

Now that we have a formula for the probability of $y_i$, we can use it to define a function that describes **how likely** it is that a certain value of $y$ is generated by a certain value of $x$ and a certain value of $w$. This function is known as the **likelihood function**.

$$L(y | x ; w) = \prod_{i=1}^n P(y_i | x_i; w)$$

Our goal is to find the values of $w$ that are most likely to generate the data we have. In other words, we want to find the values of $w$ that maximize the likelihood function. 

We define the weights that maximize the likelihood as:

$$ w_{MLE} = \arg \max_{w} L(y | x ; w) $$

We can find $w_{MLE}$ by taking the derivative of the likelihood function with respect to $w$ and setting it to zero.

To make this a bit easier, we will instead use the log-likelihood function (that has an identical maximum), which is defined as:

$$ \ell(y | x ; w) = \sum_{i=1}^n \log P(y_i | x_i; w) $$
$$ = -\frac{n}{2} \log(2\pi\sigma^2) - \frac{1}{2\sigma^2} \sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - w^T x_i)^2$$

Now we take the derivative of the log-likelihood function and set it to zero.

$$\nabla_w \ell(w) = \frac{1}{\sigma^2} X^T (Y - Xw) = 0$$

After which we will find the optimal weights $w$.

$$w_{MLE} = (X^T X)^{-1} X^T Y$$


## Relation to minimizing the MSE

In [our previous post]({{ linearRegressionPost }}), we discussed the linear regression model as well. Here we took a rather arbitrary decision and used the MSE as a metric to find the optimal weights. While using the MSE might be intuitive, the decision to use it lacked formal justification.

However, if we look closely at the normal equations we found in the previous post, we can see that the weights that maximize the likelihood are the same as the weights that minimize the MSE.

$$w_{MSE} = (X^T X)^{-1} X^T y$$

This proves that that the MSE approach is equivalent to maximizing the likelihood.
